feat: Add backup / restore Eclipse Che installation blog (#3)
eclipse-che/blog: _posts/2021-07-08-backup-restore-che-installation.md

---
title: Back up and Restore Eclipse Che Installation
layout: post
author: Mykola Morhun
description: >-
  How to create backups and do recovery of Eclipse Che
categories: []
keywords: ['backup', 'back up', 'restore']
slug: /@mmorhun/backup-restore-che-installation
---

### Introduction

Any application that runs in production should be backed up regularly.
Even if the application runs inside Kubernetes or Openshift cluster.
To back up an application in a Kubernetes or Openshift cluster, cluster admin should back up all the resources and definitions that the application owns and uses.
It could be pretty easy in case when the application is, for example, a deployment with attached volume.
But what if the application has a lot of objects to back up?

> In such case the task becomes much more complicated and will require from the admin understanding on how the components of the application work and interact with each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such case the task becomes more complicated and requires an understanding on how the components of the application work and interact with each other.
```

Or... just back up the whole cluster, however, such approach has a lot of overhead.

> To address the backup / restore problem in [Eclipse Che](https://www.eclipse.org/che/), backup / restore feature was implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address this problem in [Eclipse Che](https://www.eclipse.org/che/), the backup and restore feature was implemented.
```

> With it, cluster admin doesn't have to be aware of Eclipse Che internals in order to create a backup or do recovery of Che.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With it, an admin doesn't have to be aware of Eclipse Che internals in order to create a backup or do recovery of Che.
```

> Eclipse Che (Eclipse Che operator to be more precise) can create backups and restore the installation even if Che cluster was completely deleted!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse Che (Eclipse Che operator to be more precise) can create backups and restore the installation even if a Che installation was completely deleted!
```

> (Che operator should be available, though).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This works only if Che has been installed using the operator (`chectl server:deploy` using installers `olm` or `operator`).
```

Let me show you how easy the process of backing up and restoring Che is now.
But first, let's talk about backup servers a bit.

### Internal vs external backup server

When all data for backup is gathered into a snapshot, then it is encrypted and sent to a backup server.
The backup server should be set up beforehand and be accessible from within the cluster.
This step requires choosing the backup server type and manual configuration of it.

To make life a bit easier, Eclipse Che can automatically set up and configure a backup server in the same cluster.
Such approach requires no additional configuration as everything is automated, but the main downside of it is that backups are stored in the same cluster and even the same namespace as Eclipse Che.

> Note, for production use, it is recommended to set up a backup server outside of the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note, for production use, it is recommended to set up a backup server in a distinct Kubernetes cluster.
```

Author: In general, it doesn't have to be in a cluster at all. We support AWS S3 or a user can host own backup server which is not part of a cluster...

The CR might be deleted after backup is finished.

If one need to request internal backup server and create a backup, `CheClusterBackup` with `useInternalBackupServer` property set to `true` should be created:
```yaml
apiVersion: org.eclipse.che/v1
kind: CheClusterBackup
metadata:
  name: eclipse-che-backup
spec:
  useInternalBackupServer: true
```
Note, it will create an instance of `CheBackupServerConfiguration` and corresponding secrets automatically.

#### Restoring

To restore from a backup snapshot, a new CR of `CheClusterRestore` type should be created:
```yaml
apiVersion: org.eclipse.che/v1
kind: CheClusterRestore
metadata:
  name: eclipse-che-restore
spec:
  backupServerConfigRef: backup-server-configuration
```

By default the latest snapshot is taken.
However, it is possible to restore from a specific snapshot by adding `snapshotId` field under `spec` section.

To monitor the restore state, one may read status of the corresponding CR:
```bash
$ kubectl get CheClusterRestore eclipse-che-restore -n eclipse-che -o yaml | grep -A 5 ^status
```
Once the restore finishes, the CR can be deleted.

### Limitations

> As of now, there are two major limitations with backup and restore:

Reviewer: Are there some issues to track these limitations? It would be nice to put a link to the GH issues here.

Author: > Backing up of user's projects inside workspaces hasn't been implemented yet. So, all not committed changes will not be restored.

There is no separate issue yet. An item for the problem present in [this epic](https://github.com/eclipse/che/issues/18043).

> Backup snapshots are bind to the specific cluster, so it is not possible to restore snapshot on another cluster in general case. This is because Che binds to some cluster ID's.

The problem was discussed on cabal call. So far no plans to fix as Che users are bound to cluster users.
